 This is lesson four, choosing to pay attention to the positive and practicing gratitude. This lesson is all about what is attention and how do we actually direct our attention to things that lead us to feeling and behaving better. Because our attention really can go in one of three ways. It can go to the negative, it could go to the neutral, which means it has no kind of Uh, emotional weight to it or it can go to the positive and there's one direction that actually helps us reap resilient benefits and we're going to jump into that.

But before we really can have a thoughtful discussion about choosing to pay attention to the positive, we first need to define what is attention and attention has been defined as that which takes possession of our mind. Another way to think about it is attention is the focal point of our consciousness.

The things that we notice and come to the forefront of our consciousness. It is like a, a, a spotlight that illuminates things in your mind. And we can think about all the different things that are happening around you right now, but you're paying attention to something specific. And hopefully it's me delivering this lesson and not something else that's irrelevant.

But our attention can go many different ways, but it's that which is actually captured and spotlighted. Researchers have followed people and figured out how many things are they consciously aware of or do they pay attention to on the average day. And they've estimated roughly There's 20, 000 things, the average of noticeable thoughts or conscious images that people attend to each day.

The trouble is when we look at the ratio of what we attend to in terms of positive to negative and what we find is the ratio is way in favor of paying more attention to the negative than the positive. Here's another example of how our natural tendency actually works against us and can cause more distress than good.

We are actually hardwired to pay more attention to the negative than the positive. And we can look back to our ancestors to really understand why. If we attend to the negative, such as stressful, harmful, dangerous situations, we can understand how this can enhance survival, and those who actually paid more attention to the negative were more likely to pass on their genes.

Whereas the counterpart paying more attention to the positive didn't reap as much survival benefits. So over time we are now more prone if you will doesn't mean everybody but most people are more prone to paying attention to the negative aspects of what's happening in their lives and research by Roy Baumeister has demonstrated that When in our action, interactions with others, we pay more attention, negative attention to what we don't like, what the person did wrong, or how they're screwing up, versus paying attention to what the person did well, what we actually like about them, what we think is admirable.

A, uh, uh, uh, characteristic. Also in our own experiences, when we perform, we're most more likely to look at the negative aspects of our performance versus finding the silver linings. This all, this tendency for negative attention actually has implications for how we feel. The meaningfulness we get out of life and ultimately how we behave in life.

So we're going to talk about how we actually gain troll can gain control of our attention and focus on paying more attention to the positive aspects of our lives. There's a concept that's been researched with regard to attention and it's called selective attention and many people know this as the cocktail party effect.

And the cocktail party effect refers to selectively concentrating on one thing while ignoring all other things. So we can imagine ourselves going to a cocktail party where there's numerous people and we know kind of the volume of different, uh, chatter that's going on in the room. But we have the ability to get into a more intimate, intimate conversation and pay attention selectively to only what's happening between you and the other person.

And this is what selective attention is. We can also be involved in what seems like a conversation, but be selectively attending to someone else's conversation because we heard a certain word that has captured our attention. So selective attention really means honing in on one thing at the exclusion of everything else going on.

So what's the implications of this for resilience? Well, we have a specific type of selective attention, and that's called the negative confirmation bias. And a lot of research has shown that people are prone to having a negative conver, confirmation bias. And that means only seeing others or situations.

through a negative lens and failing to pay attention to the positive things. It creates kind of a tunnel vision. You exclude everything else and all you pick up on are those things that are negative, annoying, or problematic about situations and others, which ultimately impacts how we feel towards others or situations and ultimately how we behave.

And we can easily imagine how we behave can actually make matters worse for ourselves, create more stress, and engage in, uh, behaviors that are disconnected from our values. I'm hoping you can say this out loud, um, after I say it, but We are not victims of our attention. Go ahead and say it. That's because we have the ability to effortfully control what we do with our attention.

We may not be able to control what captivates our attention, but through awareness we can notice that we're paying attention to something negative and divert our attention to something that's more positive and uplifting that causes us to feel behave better and ultimately behave better. So we can purposely choose to attend to something that's more positive when we notice we're focusing on the negative.

So what does the research say about people who strive to pay more attention to the positive in life, rather than fixate on the negative? I'm sure you know someone in your life who's a really positive person. They always have kind of that positive spin, they always pick up on things that are positive in each and every situation.

Versus dwell on the negative. And you can imagine how nice it is to be around those people. I actually played basketball with a guy who's overly positive and we're disappointed when he's not around because he increases the atmosphere. Everybody has a better time. as a result of his presence. But there's real benefits.

You don't have to be born with the ability to pay attention to the positive. You can actually cultivate and practice it. And the benefits that have been shown through research include people reporting having a more satisfying life. What better, uh, definition of success is someone who sits back and says, my life is super satisfying, enjoyable, and fulfilling.

People are more likely to build relationships with others rather than burn them. They're able to cope better with stressful life circumstances and bounce back from adverse situations such as a death of a loved one, uh, financial difficulties, relationship problems. People have better immune systems that resist illnesses.

Your body physically your body's in a better place to handle kind of illnesses. People recover quicker from setbacks. They've even done studies where they've given people cuts. and help them pay attention to more positive things. And people who received that support to pay more attention healed significantly more quicker than people that didn't receive that support.

So we have a range of psychological and physical benefits that lead to resilience when we actually purposely choose to pay attention to the positive. So the point of everything I just said is that first we have a tendency to selectively pay attention to more negative aspects of our life, which ultimately impacts how we feel and behave, which isn't necessarily a good thing.

And we understand that we're hardwired and we have that tendency, so we have to kind of rectify those situations. The next point is that we actually learn that we have the ability to intentionally choose to pay more attention to positive things. And the last thing is that we can actually engage in a process called attention training, which is the process of purposefully practicing paying attention to the positive aspects of ourselves, others, and our surrounding environments to rewire certain pathways in our brain.

When we actually spend more time focusing and paying attention to the positive things that are happening in our lives. We rewire the circuitry of our brain, and we're more likely to have that kind of more positive lens in the future. I'm gonna cover three things you can do. to actually practice choosing to pay attention to the positive.

Another way of saying that is to engage in that attention training where we can help rewire the circuitry of our brain. And the first thing I want to discuss is searching for the silver lining. And this is kind of more of a metaphor that we're going to borrow from. And the idea is that every cloud, whether it's a storm cloud, a dark cloud, has a silver lining to it.

That means we actually in Some of the worst circumstances we can face in life, there's still positive things going on. Yet we, we have a tendency to selectively kind of think and stay fixated about all the negative. So people in some of the most troublesome circumstances still have the ability to find the small things and that is the silver lining.

And the small things might be a simple interaction with someone else. A small thing might be something about the beauty. environment you're in, you caught a sunrise, you noticed some type of wildlife that you never noticed before, you're amazed at the complexity of what it's like to live in an urban setting and how within all the chaos there's organization, things like that is about paying attention.

to kind of the silver lining that's happening each day. But you have to practice it, just like you would go shoot free throws, just like you would go and practice, you know, running, or you would practice cooking, anything, you get better with the rehearsal. So you have to spend time actually purposely directing your attention to find the silver lining.

That's one way we can practice this, uh, uh, choosing attention, to pay attention to the positive. The next is choosing to see the positive in others. This really requires you noticing your natural tendency to perhaps pay more attention to the negative. So you have to search and find something that you actually Like, approve of, admire, something about someone else that may inspire you.

So you have to actually pay attention to another person in a different kind of way. And what you'll find is you'll be more open and you'll feel more connected to that person versus engaging behaviors that can actually harm a relationship or do something that actually causes a person to act towards you in a way that induces more stress in the future.

So one way we can actually purposely practice this is choosing to see the positive in others and kind of staying away from that negative tendency. Developing positive go to staples. Go to staples are essentially fixtures in your life. It's easy for a parent to think about a positive go to staple because they have their child.

And that's what we mean by a positive go to staple. Anytime you're in a stressful situation, it's a go to. It's something you can turn to to think about and refocus your attention on that to feel better. So, I might be in the most stressful situation. I have a, a really strict di uh, deadline. I don't feel like I can meet that deadline.

I have a lot of people communicating me and putting pressure on me. And so, I see my stress go up. And so, I'm thinking all about that. My attention is focused on this kind of negative. I can give myself a break by diverting my attention to something that's a positive go to staple. And that's a positive fixture in your life.

It could be a person. It may be a vacation. That's on the horizon. That's going to be a really, uh, enjoyable experience. So you just alter and direct your attention to that more positive fixture so you can have a better feeling and ultimately engage in better behaviors moving forward. So these are three ways in which we can specifically choose to pay attention to the more positive aspects of our lives rather than getting stuck in a rut of thinking only about the negative.

We're now going to turn our attention to a specific type of paying attention to our lives, and it's called gratitude, and gratitude is ultimately cultivated by paying attention to life in a special way. So what is this special way? It's a way of positively reflecting on what has happened to us, or what's been brought into our lives and our experiences, and when we actually pay attention in this special type of way, focusing on what we have deep appreciation for or are thankful for, we actually cultivate gratitude as a feeling.

And gratitude is really more of a feeling. It's a felt sense of wonderful thankfulness and appreciation for both the small and big things that come along with life. And when we have a deep sense of gratitude, We actually have a sense of awe. And that positive emotional experience has been shown to improve resiliency, improve overall mental and physical well being.

So gratitude can happen to us in kind of a happenstance way or serendipitous way or we can purposefully cultivate and practice gratitude and we're going to actually focus on how we can actually purposefully cultivate it so we can achieve its benefits. And there are numerous benefits that scientific research has uncovered.

associated with purposefully practicing gratitude. And we know that people intentionally do this are more satisfied with life, they're overall happier, more optimistic about their futures, they're better at handling challenging situations, they have fewer illnesses, they get more sleep, they exercise more, and are able to think more clearly.

and kind of problem solving situations. So gratitude produces a number of resiliency benefits that are in our best interest. So the next question is how do we actually cultivate and practice this. Gratitude isn't just creating a checklist like, oh yeah I'm grateful for that, oh yeah I love these people, oh that was cool that happened.

There's a specific way to actually, or best practices of gratitude. So it's the way in which people think about positive life events and practice gratitude that's critical. So one of the essential ingredients is that you're going to actually believe in it and intentionally practice it. So if you don't believe that gratitude's important.

It's, you're not going to reap its benefits. And if you don't find time to do gratitude practices, then you can't reap its benefits. That's kind of like the no duh part of this. The second element is the deeper the processing, the greater the benefit the person experiences. So more than just saying, Oh yeah, I'm grateful to have that person in my life.

You, you ask a deeper question. It's not just who or what happened, it's why you're grateful. And that causes you to really kind of search and uncover why. Why are you grateful? What aspects of that person actually cause you to have a sense of, a deep sense of appreciation or thankfulness for? One, I guess, trick you can use to create that deeper level of processing, rather than thinking about the presence of an event, we can create deeper processing by thinking about the absence of a positive event.

So we would ask ourselves, what if that person wasn't in our life? And that really puts us in a position to go, oh my gosh. And that's where we can cultivate that sense. Gratitude is really a sense, a feeling. Many people can, we have different times in our lives where we experience gratitude. You may think about a loved one.

And you think about the absence of that person and it almost can bring you to tears. But it's not tears of sadness, it's just tears of appreciation. And that's what we mean by gratitude as an emotional experience that can be cultivated by positively reflecting on aspects of our lives. I'm going to give you a little nuts and bolts on how gratitude works to improve our well being.

So if I purposefully and intentionally practice gratitude and process what I'm grateful for, and I try to process at a deep level by asking why I'm grateful for that thing or person, and imagine the absence of that thing or person, So I can think at a deeper level. I'm likely to get increased psychological well being.

I'm going to feel better after the fact. People also report having increased social functioning. So they're more likely to interact more positively with others. And have increased physical well being more. Meaning more vitality, energy to do things. When we have those things, It actually creates greater alertness, energy, and joyfulness on our part.

We're more likely to be generous, compassionate, and engage in pro social behaviors. We often sleep better and longer. We exercise more and we ultimately feel less stress. And that In and of itself means that we're better rested, we're, we're happier, we have decreased levels of stress that can produce that kind of chronic wear and tear.

We have a greater sense of fulfillment and we're more connected to it with others. So that's how practicing gratitude intentionally actually can operate and work and improve the types of outcomes that enable us to become resilient. My hope by now is that you've been sold on the process of purposefully and intentionally practicing gratitude in order to reap the resilience benefits.

So now I want to give you the more important element, or what can you actually do? What are the gratitude practices that you can do to actually pull your attention, to reflect on positive aspects of your life that you have a deep appreciation for or are really thankful for? The first one is weekly gratitude journaling, and we're going to discuss what that looks like.

The second one is more of an ongoing thing that you can do, and that's just creating thank you notes. Writing, essentially, thank you notes for potentially anything that life presents that you're thankful for. And the most impactful one that's been shown through research is actually doing, writing a gratitude letter, and engaging in a gratitude visit.

to someone who you're really grateful to have in your life. The first gratitude exercise we're going to cover is weekly gratitude journaling. And thankfully research has identified the optimal frequency. So you don't need to get too crazy by doing it every day or multiple times per day, but you don't want to do it.

to infrequently, like once a month, or once every other month. Really, research has pinpointed once a week as the optimal frequency to engage in gratitude journaling. So let's talk about what the gratitude journaling process actually looks like. You want to reflect on your week, and you want to identify five things.

For which you are grateful for or was surprised in a positive way that happened. So you want to list these five things. But then we need to engage in that deeper processing. You're also going to write about how that positive event, if it never happened, how would that have affected you? And so we're going to really think about, and it's going to cause you to think about, why you're grateful for that event or that person or action that was in your way.

So that's essentially the structure is identifying five things that you had have an appreciation for or thankful for or grateful for in the past week and really imagining the absence of that event so you can process why it really was a meaningful event that happened to you. The next, uh, gratitude exercise is writing thank you notes about really conceivably anything that enters into your life that you're thankful, grateful, or have an appreciation for.

Some can be kind of serious and some can be not so serious and kind of funny, but in some way you were grateful for that happen, happening. So, Imagine actually writing a note to something and it can be over anything. It can be a person, it can be an object. So I'm going to give you a couple that I've written in the past that are just when I entered into my attention, why am I grateful for these things?

And why do I have appreciation for? And often they're the smallest, sometimes odd things. That are in our lives. So one I wrote was to my clean sheets, and I said dear clean sheets Thank you for being so much softer inviting than dirty ones You're the best thing to climb into after a tough day at work.

Gratefully clay. That's something I just noticed I'm thankful that I have the ability to actually have clean, soft, nice sheets. And it was something that I really had an appreciation for, particularly when you climb into those things after a tough day, and it just feels too good. Another one I wrote was, Dear Wox, Thank you for being the activity that allows me to break and come up with my best ideas.

It used to be showers, but showers don't allow me to get in shape. So this is something that I just have, I have the ability to go walk around, and actually not only does it afford me the ability to think and come up with ideas, but I also get to exercise, so I have an appreciation for the, just the ability to be able to walk and, uh, experience that type of thing.

I also work with young kids, and those young kids often, uh, have emotional and behavioral problems, and so I wrote this one to a little boy who kind of pushed my temper, and I said, Dear little boy who pushes my temper, thank you for being the student who pushes me to become a better psychologist, while also helping me appreciate my own child.

And this is a way to spin. And using positive attention to reflect on my experience to say, what am I grateful for? This person is actually causing me to become better. And also it gives me a sense of appreciation for my own family members. So this is, these are examples of writing simple thank you notes about really anything that enters your life that you appreciate or grateful for or have an appreciation of.

The last gratitude exercise, and the one the research actually has the most support for, is actually doing a gratitude letter or visit. Martin Seligman, who is, uh, considered the godfather of the positive psychology movement, actually developed this technique at the University of Pennsylvania in one of his psychology courses.

And the gratitude letter or visit actually, It requires the person to sit down and write a letter to a mentor, a family member, a friend, or any other important person in your, in the person's life whom they've never really properly thanked or conveyed. appreciation to. And so you write to this person a letter and tell them what it is about them that you're truly grateful and you appreciate and you're thankful for.

When you write that love letter, you then prepare. to do the visit. And this visit is a face to face meeting with that person. And the person doesn't necessarily know the nature of why you want to get together with them. It could be a family member, anybody in your life who you want to write this letter for.

But you're going to arrange this meeting. And at the meeting, you're going to actually read the letter to them and give the letter to them. This may seem kind of like an awkward or uncomfortable situation, and it often is for people. But on the back end, it may, while you're delivering the letter, may seem a little bit awkward and uncomfortable.

The benefits are tremendous. People's happiness levels, life satisfaction levels, their physical well being measures, have been shown to improve for months and months. following doing engaging in such an intentional practice. So this one really requires reflecting and identifying a person who you want to write this letter to.

And then ultimately the delivery of that letter by reading the letter to them and giving them a copy. If you want to reap the benefits, this is perhaps one of the most beneficial, um, gratitude practices that you can do. Through practicing the three gratitude exercises we discussed, you can reap the resiliency benefits by really cultivating that positive emotional experience, which is what we define as gratitude.

So I really encourage you to integrate practices such as these in your lives to cultivate gratitude by purposely choosing to pay attention to those things that you have a deep appreciation for in life.

This is Lesson 5, Managing Intense Negative Emotions and Cultivating Positive Ones. In this lesson, we're going to dive into everything related to emotions, and we're going to learn that to become resilient means gaining mastery of our emotions, so they don't get the best of us, but also getting the most out of life by spending more time in a happy, fulfilled state.

The first thing I want to do is jump into some quotes, some relevant quotes that kind of capture the importance of emotions. And the first is by author Oscar Wilde, and he said, I don't want to be at the mercy of my emotions. I want to use them, enjoy them, and to dominate them. And this really captures the essence that Emotions can help us, but they can also dominate us and actually control us, take control of our lives.

Daniel Goleman, who's the author of a book called Emotional Intelligence, he issued this quote, and it basically says this, If your emotional abilities aren't in hand, if you don't have self awareness, if you're not able to manage your distressing emotions, Then no matter how smart you are, you're not going to get very far in life.

This is very true. If we look at scientific research on emotional control, an individual's ability to manage their distressing emotions, as well as intentionally incorporate practices, activities in their lives that cultivate positive emotions. It's intimately related to their well being and overall life satisfaction.

In order to have a productive conversation about why we need to manage intense negative emotions and cultivate positive emotions, we first need to define what they are. So if big toes are for balance and our tongues are for tasting, our noses are for smelling, then what kind of possible function could emotions have?

Emotions actually serve many vital purposes such as Learning, development of memories, our ability to communicate, gain information about our environments, and ultimately, to motivate us. So, motivations are a critical aspect to our functioning and our behavior. There really are three criteria that define emotion.

The first is, an emotion is a subjective experience that combines our bodily reactions and our cognitive reactions, such as pleasure or pain. Let me go a little bit further into this component. So our bodily reactions could consist of our heart rate. How fast or slow we breathe, the temperature of our skin, whether we have butterflies in our belly or not, those are the types of bodily sensations we can experience.

that are attached to an emotion. So emotions carry that bodily reaction. They also have an aspect of the mind, which we call our cognitive reaction, such as thoughts or images that come along with this reaction to a real or perceived uh, environmental input. The second component is that they, emotions are in response to a real or imagined event or object.

and are designed to give us information about those real or imagined events or objects. So it tells us or communicates something to us about our environment or about something we're anticipating in the future or reflecting on in our past. The last component of emotion that defines it is emotions fundamentally motivate us to take certain types of behaviors or actions.

Emotions are, serve a vital motivational component. They essentially up the ante to behave in a certain way. And we're going to see how different types of emotions actually motivate or compel us to behave in different ways. In many ways, emotions get a bad rap because we stay really focused on kind of emotions that produce discomfort, pain, or suffering.

But really, emotions are essential to being a human and performing well in life and ultimately getting the most out of life. So they serve Several different useful purposes. First, as I mentioned earlier, they energize and motivate us to perform. Feelings can serve kind of as an internal judicial system in certain ways.

For example, if you feel wronged and are upset, they compel you to act and defend yourself. Hopefully in good ways. So they, they result in asserting oneself. Emotions also can energize us in a very positive manner, such as if you're happy or you're really excited. They actually cause us to engage in certain behaviors that feel good.

That cause us to reflect on life as being really satisfying. We also mentioned how emotions give us feedback about our environment. They communicate to us. For example, the easiest way to think about it is a lot of emotions communicate threat. There's a reason why we experience anger. Anger. Helps us to defend ourselves.

So if something, and we feel angry, we're having that bodily reaction, and we have thoughts of anger, they often compel us to defend ourselves, in many ways, in justified ways. But we'll also learn how that anger could also get the best of us. They're also important for memory and learning. Things that carry emotional weight to them are more likely to be recalled at a later time point.

The quintessential aspect of this is, uh, what's called flashbulb memories. When something really emotionally intense happens, Someone is likely to be able to remember that event with such intense detail at a later time point, a year, five years, a decade later, given how emotional tense the situation is.

On a more subtle level, it's really important to think about if we want to learn things and remember them, there has to be an element of of emotion, uh, that we bring to the fore in order to retain the information. If there's not much emotional weight to the subject matter, that's when learning's at its lowest.

Last, think about it. Emotions add flavor to our life. If we didn't experience emotions, reflect just one moment what life would be like. You would experience kind of a numbness. You would go through life without any type of up or down. Now what we need to do is figure out how to spend more time up and prevent how much time we actually spend down.

And that's what we're going to go into next is discussing different types of emotions. In a very simple way, emotions can be classified as either negative or positive. Negative emotions are those that accompany a somewhat unpleasant or aversive experience. So your body, the sensations in your body are somewhat unpleasant.

The images or thoughts that are coming to your mind are somewhat unpleasant. What those, that element of unpleasantness produces, it restricts our attention and ultimately narrows our behavior. So we often think about negative emotions as narrowing our attention and our behavior. The easiest way to think about this is The negative emotion of anxiety.

Anxiety is an element of feeling uncomfortable. And what we focus and narrow our attention on is that which is producing the anxiety. So imagine if you're stressed about finances and it's causing you to be really anxious, you're really narrowing your focus to actually solve that issue at hand. So negative emotions can be useful in the in the sense of causing us to really hone in and focus on something to solve it.

Think about anger. Anger is a negative emotion, and it causes us to narrow our attention, and ultimately narrow the types of actions we're going to engage in. And that is to protect ourself or defend ourself. If something is causing us to feel angry, What is that? We're going to focus on what is causing us to be anger, and we're going to try to make it stop.

Or we're going to try to just get out of the situation entirely. So we can see how negative emotions actually narrow or restrict our attention, and ultimately limit the types of behaviors or actions we'll take. Positive emotions, if they serve, uh, if negative emotions serve the purposes of narrowing, then positive emotions serve the purpose of broadening.

Our attention and broadening our behaviors so we can think about a positive motion such as joy leads to greater play or partying pride, for example, broadens our perspective, give us gives us greater confidence, and we're more likely to commit to taking on additional things. Interest is a positive emotional experience.

When you're highly interested in something, it causes us to explore, which is a broadening of the repertoire of actions we're likely to take on. So we can kind of see that there's value to both negative emotions and positive emotions. Negative emotions narrow and restrict our attention and our behaviors, whereas positive emotions broaden both our attention, what we attend to in our environments, and ultimately our behaviors.

Each one of us experiences emotions. Emotions have a lot of range to them. They can range from being very subtle to actually ranging to being paring and disordering to us. For example, everybody experiences anxiety. In a lot of, uh, situations, anxiety is justified. It's a normal fear in response to life, whereas a panic attack or absolutely freaking out is when anxiety becomes too intense.

So we think about emotions ranging from normal to impairing. We all experience emotions. I'm sure you've experienced anger before, but has that anger led you to grabbing a baseball bat and actually bashing in the window of someone else's? Home or actual car so we can all experience anger But sometimes anger becomes so intense it results in highly problematic behaviors We all experience sadness you're going to experience it in life multiple times.

But does sadness reach its level of depression? And often, when sadness becomes too intense, someone can be called clinically depressed. That means they have a really negative, saddened outlook about life. Even happiness can range from what is actually normal levels of happiness to very exaggerated, impairing levels of happiness.

This is what we call, in a clinical sense, mania. or a manic episode where someone is so happy and excited that they can't even get sleep and they engage in certain behaviors that are problematic in terms of risk taking behaviors. So it's important to understand emotions in terms of their range or a continuum they fall on that start with normal reactions.

to impairing reactions. Our goal is to manage our emotions so they don't reach that level of being impairing to us and causing problems, ultimately compromising our resilience. The reason why we need to manage intense emotions is they can really make us stupid. We've talked about in previous lessons about the brain and our response.

So we have the limbic system here. We have our frontal cortex. These two do communicate with each other, but when emotions get really intense, We can blow our lid and we actually lose our ability to engage in kind of rational, logical thinking. Think for a moment why the character Spock on Star Trek is so appealing to people.

Who would they go to for good decisions? Why would they go to Spock? And when we look at that character, what's interesting about him, he allegedly didn't experience intense Emotions, so we can maintain good, rational, logical thinking to solve problems. This is where emotions really contaminate our ability to think clearly and make good decisions.

And the way I like to think about it is people do really regrettable things under the influence of intense negative emotions. If you happen to drive your car, think about the concept of road rage for a moment. We all behave in certain ways that we later regret. When we get upset while driving, someone cuts you off or does something you don't like.

You might say a few choice words. You might actually gesture at them in an aggressive manner. And when you calm down, you reflect on that and go, Why did I even do that? That's how negative emotions work. I'm sure if you've had a friendship. or an intimate relationship with a partner, you've said or done something when you were upset that you later regretted and realized you could have handled yourself differently.

This is the impact of really intense negative emotions that cause us to behave in ways that are self defeating, make the situation worse for ourselves and others. It's important to do a self assessment of our emotional reactions and whether they actually fit particular situations. So we're going to go over a couple of examples that highlight And an assessment of whether an emotion actually fits the situation.

The first thing I want you to consider is a woman who may be grieving in response to the death of a loved one. Is it normal for someone to be saddened and cry in response to the loss of a loved one? Obviously, it's a normal reaction to feel saddened. This isn't a situation in which we'd want them to, someone to exert emotion management and control.

That's a normal reaction to a situation. However, let's fast forward two years ahead and imagine that the woman has lost her job, no longer goes out with friends or family, and makes statements such as there's no reason to keep on going because she's still saddened and grieving the loss of that loved one.

We can easily see in the latter situation how emotional reactions don't necessarily fit the situation. Let's imagine another scenario, and this one involves a young child with dogs. In the first scenario, we're gonna, there's a big, ferocious dog trying to attack a child. Would it be a normal reaction, fear reaction, for the child to scream and try to flee the situation?

That's completely normal. Now let's imagine that the child goes to different places, and even if there's a nice, cute, cuddly puppy, the child will freak out and want to flee the situation. It gets so bad that the parents can't even take the child any place where there might be a dog because the child becomes so upset.

As you can see in the second part of this, that the emotion no longer fits the situation. And that's when there's a need to actually manage that intense negative emotion. Let's Take one more example here. Imagine I sneezed in my hand, and you happen to be with me here, and I went to shake your hand, and you were thinking, man, that's pretty disgusting.

But, just to be out of social reciprocity, you extend your hand and you go ahead and shake it. Would it be a normal reaction to feel kind of disgusted, and be thinking about, man, I need to wash my hands so I don't get germs? That's a normal reaction to that situation, and so you're, you feel disgusted and you want to clean yourself.

What would be an abnormal reaction is if you felt disgust, you went to the bathroom, scrubbed your hand, and were so anxious that you would catch some type of germ or disease, you had to re wash your hands and re wash your hands over and over and over, such that you stayed in the bathroom for over 30 minutes.

There are people who get so worked up emotionally when situations like that happen that they obsessively do things over and over and over. And, until they feel like they've actually rid themselves of that. So it's important here. In one situation, the emotion can fit the situation. We don't want to manage, control our emotions in those situations when we do a self assessment.

In another situation, our emotions don't fit the situation. And that becomes when we need to really focus on managing our intense negative emotions.